well you know the work of a
Transportation Commissioner isn't just
about stop signs and traffic signals it
involves the design of cities and the
design of city streets streets are some
of the most valuable resource that a
city has and yet it's an asset that's
largely hidden in plain sight and the
lesson from New York over the past six
years is that you can update this asset
you can remake your streets quickly
inexpensively it can provide immediate
benefits and it can be quite popular you
just need to look at them a little
differently this is important because we
live in an urban age for the first time
in history most people live in cities
and the UN estimates that over the next
40 years the population is going to
double on the planet so the design of
cities is a key issue for our future
Mayor Bloomberg recognized this when he
launched PlaNYC in 2007
the plan recognized that cities are in a
global marketplace and that if we're
going to continue to grow and thrive and
to attract the million more people that
are expected to move here we need to
focus on the quality of life and the
efficiency of our infrastructure for
many cities our streets have been in the
kind of suspended animation for
generations this is a picture of Times
Square in the 50s and you know despite
all of the technological innovation
cultural changes political changes this
is Times Square in 2008 not much has
changed in those 50 years so we worked
hard to refocus our agenda to maximize
efficient mobility providing more room
for buses more room for bikes more room
for people to enjoy the city and to make
our streets as safe as they can be for
everybody that uses them
we set out a clear action plan with
goals and benchmarks having goals is
important because if you want to change
and steer the ship of a big city in a
new direction you need to know where
you're going and why the design of a
street can tell you everything about
what's expected on it in this case it's
expected that you shelter-in-place the
design of the street is really to
maximize the movement of cars moving as
quickly as possible from point A to
point B and misses all the other ways
that a street is used when we started
out we did some early surveys about how
our streets were used and we found that
New York City was largely a city without
seats you know pictures like this people
perched on a fire hydrant not the mark
of a world-class City it's not great for
parents with kids it's not great for
seniors it's not great for retailers
it's probably not good for the fire
hydrants certainly not good for the
police department so we worked hard to
change that balance and probably the
best example of our new approach is in
Times Square 350,000 people a day walk
through Times Square and people have
tried for years to make change as they
change signals they change lanes
everything they could do to make Times
Square work better it was dangerous hard
to cross the street it was chaotic and
so none of those approaches worked so we
took a different approach a bigger
approach looked at our Street
differently and so we did a six-month
pilot we closed Broadway from 42nd
Street to 47th Street and created two
and a half acres of new pedestrian space
and the temporary materials are an
important part of the program because we
were able to show how it worked and I
work for a data-driven mayor as you
probably know so it was all about the
data so if it worked better for traffic
if it was better for mobility if it was
safer better for business we would keep
it
and if it didn't work no harm no foul we
could put it back the way that it was
because these were temporary materials
and that was a very big part of the buy
in much less anxiety when you think that
something can be put back but the
results were overwhelming traffic moved
better it was much safer five new
flagship stores opened it's been a total
home run Times Square is now one of the
top ten retail locations on the planet
and it this is an important lesson
because it doesn't need to be a zero-sum
game between moving traffic and creating
public space you know every project has
its surprises and one of the big
surprises with Times Square was how
quickly people flocked to the space you
know we put out the orange barrels and
people just materialized immediately
into the street it was like a Star Trek
episode you know they weren't there
before and then all the people arrived
you know where they've been I don't know
that they were there and this actually
posed an immediate challenge for us
because the street furniture had not yet
arrived so we went to a hardware store
and bought hundreds of lawn chairs and
we put those lawn chairs out on the
street and the lawn chairs became the
talk of the town it wasn't about that
we've closed Broadway two cars it was
about those lawn chairs what did you
think about the lawn chairs you liked
the color of the lawn chairs so as you
know if you've got to be controversial
project think about long chairs this is
the final design for Times Square and it
will create a level surface sidewalk to
sidewalk beautiful pavers that have
studs in them to reflect the light from
the billboards creating a great new
energy on the street and we think it's
going to really create a great place and
new crossroads of the world that is
worthy of its name and we will be
cutting the ribbon on this the first
phase this December with all of our
projects our public space projects we
work closely with local businesses and
local merchant groups who maintain the
spaces move the furniture take care of
the plants
this is in front of Macy's and they were
a big supporter of this new approach
because they understood that more people
on foot is better for business and we've
done these projects all across the city
in all kinds of neighborhoods this is in
bed-stuy Brooklyn and you can see the
short leg that was there used for cars
that not really needed so what we did is
we painted over the street and put down
epoxy gravel and connected the triangle
to the storefronts on Grand Avenue
created a great new public space and
it's been great for businesses along
Grand Avenue we did the same thing in
Dumbo in Brooklyn and this is one of our
first projects that we did and we took
an underutilized pretty dingy looking
parking lot and used some paint and
planters to transform it over a weekend
and in the three years since we've
implemented the project retail sales
have increased a hundred and seventy-two
percent and that's twice that of
adjacent areas in the same neighborhood
we've moved very very quickly with paint
and temporary materials you know instead
of waiting through years of planning
studies and computer models to get
something done we've done it with paint
and temporary materials and the proof is
not in a computer model it is in the
real-world performance of the street you
know you can have fun with paint all
told we've created over 50 pedestrian
plazas in all five boroughs across the
city we've repurposed 26 acres of active
car lanes and turned them into new
pedestrian space I think one of the
successes is in its emulation you know
you're seeing this kind of approach
since we painted Times Square are you
seeing this approach in Boston in
Chicago in San Francisco in Mexico City
Buenos Aires you name it this is
actually in Los Angeles and they
actually copied the even the green dots
that we had on the streets but I can't
underscore enough how much more quickly
this enables you to move over
traditional construction methods
we also brought this quick-acting
approach to our cycling program and in
six years turned cycling into a real
transportation option in New York I
think it's fair to say it used to be a
fairly scary place to ride a bike and
now New York has become one of the
cycling capitals in the United States
and we moved quickly to create an
interconnected network of lanes you can
see the map in 2007 this is how it
looked in 2013 after we built out 350
miles of on-street bike lanes I love
this because it looks so easy you just
you know click it and there there we
also brought new designs to the street
we created the first parking protected
bike lane in the United States he
protected bikers by floating parking
lanes and it's been great bike volumes
have spiked injuries to all users
pedestrians cyclists drivers are all
down 50 percent and we've built 30 miles
of these protected bike lanes and now
you're seeing them pop up all over the
country and you can see here that this
strategy has worked the blue line is the
number of cyclists soaring Green Line is
the number of bike lanes and the yellow
line is the number of injuries which is
remained essentially flat you know after
this big expansion you've seen you know
no net increase in injuries and so there
is something to that axiom that there is
safety in numbers not everybody liked
the new bike lanes and there was a
lawsuit and somewhat of a media frenzy a
couple years ago one Brooklyn paper
called this bike lane that we have on
Prospect Park West the most contested
piece of land outside of the Gaza Strip
and this is what we had done so if you
dig below the headlines though you'll
see that the people were far ahead of
the press far ahead of the politicians
in fact I think most politicians would
be happy to have those kind of poll
numbers 64% of New Yorkers support these
bike lanes this summer we launched city
bike the largest bike share program in
the United States with 6,000 bikes and
330 stations located next to one another
since we've launched the program three
million trips have been taken people
have ridden 7 million miles that's 280
times around the globe and so with this
little blue key you can unlock the keys
to the city and this brand new
transportation option and daily usage
just continues to soar what has happened
is the average daily ridership on the
streets of New York is 36,000 people the
high that we've had so far is 44,000 in
August
yesterday 40,000 people you see bike in
New York City the bikes are being used
six times a day and I think you also see
it in the kind of riders that are on the
streets in the past you know it looked
like the guy on the left you know ninja
clad bike messenger and today cyclists
look you know like New York City looks
it's diverse young all black white women
kids you know all getting on a bike it's
affordable safe convenient way to get
around quite radical we've also brought
this approach to our buses and you know
New York City has the largest bus fleet
in North America the slowest bus speeds
as everybody knows you can walk across
town faster than you can take the bus
and so we focused on the most congested
areas of New York City built out six bus
rapid transit lines 57 miles of new
speedy bus lanes you pay at a kiosk
before you get on the bus we've got
dedicated lanes that keep cars out
because they get ticketed by a camera if
they use that lane and it's been a huge
success I think one of my very favorite
moments as transportation Commissioner
was the day that we launched city bike
and I was
riding city bike up first Avenue and my
protected bike lane and I looked over
and I saw pedestrians standing safely on
the pedestrian islands and the traffic
was flowing birds were singing the buses
were speeding up their dedicated lanes
it was just fantastic and this is how it
looked
six years ago and so I think that the
lesson that we have from New York is
that it's possible to change your
streets quickly it's not expensive it
can provide immediate benefits and it
can be quite popular you just need to
reimagine your streets they're hidden in
plain sight thank you
[Applause]
[Music]